Hey, welcome back to the show. Today's a deep dive,
and it's a fun one. We're talking about weekend cabins.
Specifically, what does it actually look like to get a
cabin or a piece of land within an hour or
two of Jefferson City, Missouri? I spent a day going
down this rabbit hole, looking at listings, crunching numbers, and
mapping out the options. And I think you'll find the
results pretty surprising. So let's start with the big picture.
If you want a weekend getaway spot in central Missouri,
you basically have three paths. You can buy an existing
property. You can build something from scratch. Or you can
do a hybrid approach, which is actually my favorite, and
I'll explain why later. But first, let me walk you
through the target areas, because Missouri has some genuinely great
options that a lot of people overlook. The most obvious
one is Lake of the Ozarks. It's about an hour
from Jeff City, and it's the big draw for a
reason. You've got lake access, you've got restaurants and marinas
nearby, and there's a whole ecosystem of weekend-friendly stuff. But
the prices reflect that. It's the most expensive option on
this list. Then you've got the Southern Ozarks and Mark
Twain National Forest area, which is about an hour and
a half to two hours south. This is where it
gets really interesting for people on a budget. We're talking
deep woods, rolling hills, rivers and streams, and land prices
that will make your jaw drop. I found twenty-acre parcels
near Ellington for thirty thousand dollars. Twenty acres. That's fifteen
hundred bucks an acre for gorgeous Ozark forest land. Third
option is Hermann and the Missouri wine country corridor, about
an hour east. This is more of a charming small-town
vibe. Rolling vineyards, little bed and breakfasts, great food scene.
Not as rustic as the Ozarks, but really pleasant for
a different kind of weekend. And then there's Thousand Hills
State Park area, about two hours north near Kirksville. Beautiful
lake, great hiking, and it's the least crowded option by
far. The trade-off is it's the longest drive. OK, so
let's talk about what's actually on the market right now,
because I went deep on Zillow and some other listing
sites, and there's some really compelling stuff. Near Lake of
the Ozarks, you can find small homes, we're talking one
or two bedrooms, ranging from about fifteen thousand dollars up
to around a hundred and forty thousand. Now, the fifteen
thousand dollar places? They need work. But they exist. And
at the lake, even a fixer-upper has value because of
the location. The standout listing I found was a thirty-nine
thousand dollar one-bedroom cabin with dock access. Let me say
that again. Thirty-nine K for a cabin on the lake
with dock access. Is it fancy? No. Is it a
weekend cabin where you can wake up, walk down to
the dock, and go fishing? Absolutely. Now, if you're thinking
about building instead, let's talk about land. Near Edwards, Missouri,
which is in the Lake of the Ozarks area, I
found wooded lots of two to three acres going for
five to six thousand dollars. Five to six thousand. For
your own piece of wooded Missouri land. That's, honestly, kind
of wild. If you want more space and more seclusion,
the Mark Twain National Forest area is incredible. I found
a twenty-acre parcel near Ellington for thirty thousand, and an
eleven-acre parcel near Raymondville for forty-five thousand. These are bigger
parcels with real privacy, surrounded by national forest land, so
your neighbors are basically deer and turkey. OK. So this
brings us to the build option, which I want to
break down in detail because I think a lot of
people assume building is way out of reach, and in
Missouri? It's actually surprisingly doable. And here's the kicker that
makes Missouri special: there is no statewide building code. Many
rural counties have minimal or no code enforcement at all.
That means you can build a simple cabin without navigating
a mountain of permits and inspections. I'm not saying you
should build something unsafe. I'm saying the regulatory burden is
dramatically lower than most states. So let's walk through what
a D-I-Y cabin build actually costs, piece by piece. Foundation.
For a small cabin, you're looking at a concrete pier
or post foundation, which runs about two to four thousand
dollars in materials. This is the simplest approach and it's
perfect for a weekend place. Framing and structure. If you're
doing a basic cabin, maybe six hundred square feet, you're
looking at framing lumber and materials in the eight to
twelve thousand dollar range, depending on lumber prices. You can
bring this down further if you go with a kit
cabin from a company like Jamaica Cottage Shop, which ships
pre-cut framing packages. Roofing. Metal roofing is the way to
go for a cabin. It's durable, low maintenance, and runs
about three to five thousand for a small structure. It'll
last thirty to fifty years with basically zero upkeep. Now
here's where it gets really interesting. Water. If you're on
rural land, you need a well. Well drilling in Missouri
typically runs twenty-five hundred to ninety-seven hundred dollars, depending on
depth. The Ozarks can be tricky because of the rock,
but most areas you'll hit water within a hundred to
two hundred feet. Alternatively, for a weekend-only cabin, some people
just use a large water tank that they fill up
each visit, but a well is obviously the better long-term
play. Kitchen. For a simple cabin kitchen, you're looking at
two to four thousand. A basic sink, a propane stove,
some countertop and cabinet space. You don't need granite countertops.
You need something that works. Electricity. This is where you've
got a real choice. Solar with battery storage runs about
two to five thousand for a basic off-grid setup that
can handle lights, charging, and a small fridge. Grid connection,
if it's available and close to the road, can actually
be cheaper upfront, but you'll have a monthly bill. For
a weekend cabin, solar with a battery bank is honestly
ideal. You're not running air conditioning. You're running lights, a
phone charger, and maybe a mini fridge. Heating. Wood stove.
Period. A good wood stove runs five hundred to fifteen
hundred dollars. Installation maybe another five hundred. And you're surrounded
by trees. Your fuel is literally on the ground around
you. A wood stove also adds a huge amount of
ambiance to a cabin. There's nothing like waking up on
a cold morning, getting a fire going, and making coffee
while looking out at the woods. Now, the bathroom situation.
This is where you can save a surprising amount of
money. A full septic system runs five to ten thousand
dollars, and it requires engineering and permits even in lenient
counties. But a composting toilet? We're talking three hundred to
eight hundred dollars, and no septic system needed at all.
Modern composting toilets are honestly not bad. They don't smell
if you maintain them, and for a weekend cabin, they're
perfectly adequate. Add a simple outdoor shower with a solar
shower bag for summer, and maybe a small on-demand propane
water heater for colder months, and you've got a functioning
bathroom for a fraction of the cost. And finally, I'd
budget for a covered porch. Because what's the point of
a cabin without a porch? Figure another two to three
thousand for a nice covered porch where you can sit
in the evening and watch the fireflies. So let's add
this all up. A budget D-I-Y build on a five
to six thousand dollar lot comes in around thirty-five to
forty thousand dollars total. That gets you a basic but
solid cabin with solar power, a composting toilet, a wood
stove, and a well. If you want to step it
up to a moderate build with full utilities, meaning grid
power, a real septic system, a proper bathroom with running
water and a flush toilet, you're looking at about seventy-five
to eighty-five thousand on a fifteen to thirty thousand dollar
piece of land. Here's what I think is the most
interesting finding from all this research. When you run the
numbers over a five-year time horizon, buying and building end
up costing roughly the same. That total five-year cost, including
purchase price or build costs, maintenance, property tax, insurance, everything,
lands in the forty-five to one hundred and five thousand
dollar range for both paths. The difference is really about
what you want and when you want it. Speaking of
property tax, I have to mention this because it's kind
of amazing. Property tax on rural Missouri land is almost
negligible. We're talking fifty to eighty dollars a year for
undeveloped land. Even with a small cabin on it, you're
probably looking at a few hundred dollars a year. Compare
that to property taxes in other states and it's just
laughably low. Now, let me talk about the build timeline,
because this is where people's eyes get bigger than their
stomachs. If you're a weekend warrior builder, meaning you're going
out every weekend or every other weekend to work on
it, a realistic timeline for a basic cabin is twelve
to eighteen months. And honestly? Plan for eighteen to twenty-four.
Things always take longer than you think. Weather delays, supply
chain hiccups, that weekend you just really didn't feel like
driving an hour to pour concrete. It happens. Build that
cushion into your expectations. On the kit cabin front, I
looked at Jamaica Cottage Shop, which is a popular option.
They ship pre-cut timber frame cabin kits that you assemble
on-site. The kits themselves run ten to twenty thousand depending
on size, and they dramatically simplify the framing process. You
still need to do the foundation, roofing, and interior yourself,
but the structural work is way more approachable. Another creative
option is a Tuff Shed conversion. You buy a large
Tuff Shed, which runs three to five thousand, and then
finish the interior yourself. It's not as romantic as a
timber frame cabin, but it's fast and cheap. Some people
use these as a starter structure while they build their
real cabin nearby. Now here's my actual recommendation, and this
is where I think the real value is. The hybrid
approach. Here's what I'd do. Step one: buy a cheap
lake property in the twenty-five to forty thousand dollar range.
That thirty-nine thousand dollar cabin with dock access? That's your
immediate play. You can use it this weekend. You've got
a place to go. Step two: start scoping land for
a future build. Go visit those five to six thousand
dollar lots near Edwards. Go hike the twenty-acre parcel near
Ellington. Take your time with this. Feel different properties in
different seasons. There's no rush because you already have your
weekend place. Step three: over the next year or two,
start planning and maybe even beginning your build on the
land you've chosen. You can store materials there. You can
camp there while you work. And your existing cabin gives
you a comfortable home base for weekend build trips. This
approach gives you the best of both worlds. Immediate gratification
and long-term potential. You're not waiting eighteen months for your
first weekend in the woods. You're going this weekend. And
the build project becomes a fun, low-pressure hobby rather than
a desperate race to get a roof over your head.
So let me do a quick summary of the standout
listings. Number one: that thirty-nine thousand dollar one-bedroom cabin with
dock access near the lake. Best immediate value for a
weekend escape. Number two: the five to six thousand dollar
wooded lots near Edwards. Incredible for anyone who wants to
build. Number three: twenty acres near Ellington for thirty thousand
dollars. If you want seclusion and space, this is your
move. And number four: eleven acres near Raymondville for forty-five
thousand, which is a larger investment but gets you a
serious piece of land near Mark Twain National Forest. So
bottom line. A weekend cabin in Missouri is way more
accessible than most people think. You can be in the
game for as little as fifteen to twenty thousand dollars
with a fixer-upper, or five to six thousand if you
just want to start with land and camp while you
build. The sweet spot for most people is probably that
twenty-five to fifty thousand dollar range, which gets you either
a turnkey small cabin or a piece of land with
a budget build. Missouri's combination of low land prices, almost
nonexistent property taxes, no statewide building code, and genuinely beautiful
Ozark terrain makes it one of the best states in
the country for this kind of project. If you've been
daydreaming about a weekend cabin, the numbers say it's more
doable than you might think. That's it for today's deep
dive. If you found this useful, I'd love to hear
about it. And if you end up looking at any
of these listings, let me know what you find. Until
next time, happy cabin hunting.